Assignment: Course Project (35%)

For your course project, use the skills you've developed in this class to tackle a new problem. For
example, you could develop a visualization for a complex dataset, construct a physicalization, visualize
an algorithmic process, or run an experiment to explore graphical perception. There are not many
restrictions on this one, other than it should demonstrate your mastery of the processes and ideas we
talked about in class. Be creative and have fun!
You are welcome to work on this project as an individual or in a small group. I recommend keeping
groups between 2–4 members.
This project has several moving pieces to ensure you have sufficient feedback throughout the process.
You will create a project proposal to outline the plan of work (Week 4). From there, you will have two
checkpoints where you will present your progress to the class for feedback (Weeks 7 and 12). In Week
13, you will present your final projects as well as submitting a write-up, group post-mortem, and any
accompanying artifacts.
Instructions for each element of the project are as follows:
Proposal: In order to make sure you have a sufficiently concrete plan for your final project, you will
submit a minimum 1-page proposal as a PDF on Canvas outlining your project vision. This proposal
should include the following elements (please include each as a separate section in your proposal):
● Team members (you only need to submit one proposal per team)
● Objectives and motivating problem (what problem do you plan to solve?)
● Rough plan of work with approximate milestones (how will you solve that problem?)
● Deliverables (what will you generate at the end of the project?)
The instructor will provide you with guiding feedback for your project and a set of expectations based
on this proposal. Please note that the goal here is to get feedback and define expectations for the
project. If you choose to update your project topic, you are welcome to do so, but please submit a new
proposal asap as an email to your instructor to make sure that you have concrete expectations for the
new topic.
Checkpoint Presentations: You will present your progress on your course project to the class in a 2–3
minute lightning talk. Each presentation should briefly summarize your target problem, progress so far
(with visuals if possible), current challenges, and your goals for the next checkpoint/milestone.
Deliverables: You will be graded on both the artifacts you generate as part of this project and a project
write-up. As stated above, expectations for the artifacts and write-up will be provided as feedback for
your proposal. Deliverables should be structured as follows:
Write-Up: You should approach the write-up like a research paper. It should contain the following
sections:
● A 1-paragraph abstract that summarizes your motivating problem, what you did, and what
you found
● An introduction that describes the motivating problem and why it's interesting or important
● A related work section that summarizes research related to your project (minimum eight
citations)
● A detailed description of your project and justifications for any design elements
● A discussion of what you found
The write-up should be submitted as a PDF with a minimum of four pages (including figures and
references) using the IEEE VIS Paper Format: https://tc.computer.org/vgtc/publications/journal/
Artifacts: Please upload all deliverables as a zip file in Canvas. This includes any code, data, and
documentation. If you have physical artifacts, please either reach out to the instructor to set up an
appointment to present your artifacts or submit an explanatory video and/or set of photographs. Note
that if your data is too large to submit or includes confidential information, you may work with the
instructor to set up an alternative submission.
Project Presentation: You will give a 5-minute presentation of your project followed by a brief Q&A in
class. Your presentation should summarize:
● The general problem you're trying to solve and any necessary background information to
solve that problem
● A description of your project, including a walkthrough of relevant methods, data, features
and/or design considerations, as well as how they support your target problem
● A discussion of what you found out about your target problem through your project
You will give the presentation to the class, so assume an audience of peers well-versed in basic
visualization principles as you assemble your presentation. You may use whatever medium you would
like, including slides, videos, demos, etc.
Project Post-Mortem: Team projects are a chance to work together to learn from each other and
create something fantastic. However, they can also lead to frustrations and imbalanced loads. This
project post-mortem is a chance to tell the Instructor about the team dynamics that played out over the
course of your project work. To that end, please submit the following as a text entry in Canvas:
1. What you worked on in the project
2. What your teammates worked on in the project
3. Did you run into any significant challenges coordinating with your team? If so, what steps did
you take to resolve them?
4. How you would rate your performance and why
5. How you would rate each teammates' performance and why
These documents will be kept confidential but they will factor into project grades. If you feel all of the
team worked hard and performed well, please don't hesitate to tell the instructor that (no curving is
necessary on performance reviews :-))! Also, please keep in mind that different team members have
different skillsets, roles, and experiences.
Note that even solo projects will require a post-mortem. However, post-mortems for solo projects will
only need to answer Questions 3 & 4 as they will help the instructor understand what challenges may
not be evident from the write-up (you may note responses to the remaining fields as “N/A”). You will
submit your post-mortem as a text document in Canvas.

Rubric for Course Project: 95 points
Expectations for the write-up and artifacts will be set for each project as part of the proposal feedback.
The project consists of the following components:
● Proposal: 5 points
o Proposals meeting the requirements above in a clear and professional way will be given
full credit.
● Checkpoint #1: 5 points
o Presentation is professional, clearly articulated, and 2-3 minutes in length
● Checkpoint #2: 5 points
o Presentation is professional, clearly articulated, and 2-3 minutes in length
● Post-Mortem: 5 points
o 1 point per question
● Artifact(s): 35 points
o Rubric determined based on the proposal
● Write-Up: 30 points
o Rubric determined based on the proposal
● Presentation: 10 points
o 2pts for correct length & Q&A handling
o 2pts for professional delivery and clarity
o 2pts for the motivation
o 2pts for the project description
o 2pts for discussion/reflection